# Digital Repository Utilities

This site provides documentation for the various software tools and scripts SFU Archives uses in its digital repository. Please note that it is a work in-progress, with regular updates as new sections are completed.

- Access-to-Memory (AtoM): SFU Archives' online access platform and catalog of archival descriptions

- [AIP and DIP scripts](utilities/aip-and-dip-scripts.md): Command-line scripts for retrieving AIPs and DIPs from storage and upload DIPs and metadata to the access system (AtoM)

- AIS database: Custom FileMaker database used to manage information relating to accessions and AIPs.

- Archivematica: SFU Archives' main digital preservation platform.

- Bagger: Desktop application for validating transfer packages received by Archives.

- Brunnhilde: Characterization tool for analyzing files transferred to Archives.

- [ClamAV](utilities/clamav.md): Antivirus engine used to check for malware in digital transfers.

- ePADD: Open-source software for processing and providing access to email archives.

- Fixity: Open-source utility for verifying checksums of stored packages.

- [github-issues-to-pdf script](utilities/github-issues-to-pdf.md): Command-line script used to output GitHub `Issues` as pdf files.

- FileAnalysis utility: Custom FileMaker database for working with data relating to digital transfers generated by other tools (Brunnhilde, ClamAV, Tree).

- maildir2mbox script: Python script for converting email from `maildir` to `mbox` formats.

- OfflineImap: Command-line utility for exporting email from an active system in `maildir` format.

- rsync: Command-line tool for moving transfer packages.

- SFU MoveIt: Desktop utility used by SFU department and private donors to create transfer packages as bags with transfer metadata.

- SFU ProveIt: Desktop utility for validating transfer packages received by Archives.

- SFU Vault: SFU's cloud service for file sharing and storage; used in digital transfer.

- [Tree](Tree.md): Command-line utility for analyzing the directory structure of digital transfers.

###### Last updated: Oct 30, 2020
